For us to be successful, for any group to be successful, you do have to be very, very persistent and do have to be constantly working to inform and educate people as to what you are attempting to do and how it will benefit everyone, including that administrator and...
One official I'm told has said, how do you explain the success along the natural river?
And to use the cliche, when it seems appropriate, it's the squeaky wheel against the grease.
Yeah, that's right.
Do you think that's applicable in this case?
Oh, yes, we do.
We use that saying often.
And...
It is definitely the squeaky wheel that gets the grease of the oil, but also the larger the wheel, the more oil it will get.
And so we have realized in the beginning the importance of numbers.
So how do you get numbers?
And again, maybe this comes to the organizational ability that you have.
It does.
Yeah.
One of the things I'm going to give you, Nick, is a little story that was written up by a friend of mine who was the secretary of our group.
And it's called, How Do You Clean Up a River?
You know, that's funny.
I was thinking of starting my story with the same thing.
Yeah.
Excuse me for moving that.
Can I borrow this and copy it?
Yeah, you can have it.
I guess it's the first line.
How do you clean up a river?
Oh, thank God I saw this.
I'm serious.
You know, it's the natural line.
Yeah.
And she does describe in some detail, and I re-read it just before you came, and how you do, how we went about cleaning up her river and how we organized.
Well, that's good.
Yeah, and so I don't know whether you want me to discuss this with you, because I think everything that I might tell you was in there in some more detail.
Well, this will be excellent background.
And there's something else that may be of use to, and I keep thinking and saying that we should update this, but we, several years ago, again, this is very old, we clipped newspaper articles that were most pertinent to our efforts.
And it really gives you a rundown.
If I could borrow this, I'll copy it and mail it back to you.
I'll bring it back to you.
Because we'll probably want to come up and take some pictures.
Okay.
Well, I get a kick out of this one.
These are my two sons.
The pictures were taken about ten years ago, and they're really big boys now.
They're young men.
But that's funny.
When the river...
Well, that was in 66.
In the mid-60s, the river was so putrid that people, I don't know who they were, just people would put up these signs like that one, Nashville Riverhead.
There's another sign over in Eyre and Shirley.
It said, Nazis River.
You know, it crossed out Nashville.
But...
Well, at the point this was written, which is 1970, would you say the river went as well on its way to being saved at that point?
Yes, not everyone recognized it.
I think people felt that we were overly optimistic.
I know they did, because recently I've talked with people who have said to me, well, you know, I wasn't with you then, but I am with you now.
And I said, well, what do you mean?
And he said, well...
I used not to think that it was possible to clean up the river.
And I found then that people, that a lot of people didn't support the cleanup effort because they thought it was an impossible task and no one wants to associate themselves with something that isn't going to be successful.
Yeah, right.
That's the American way.
I mean, we want it to be British.
Yeah.
But in the very beginning, what we tried to do was not to point our finger at someone or like into an industry and say, you are a bad, polluting industry, and to really shake the stick at them.
But rather, we have worked to gain their interest and their support and their cooperation.
And we have felt from the very beginning that it was not possible
for us to be successful, to restore the river and establish the greenway, unless we had the interest and support of everyone.
And so when we first organized... So is this a public relations problem?
I don't see it as a problem.
I mean, what some people call... It's a public relations challenge, a public relations exercise.
I think maybe...
I always like to use the word opportunity.
I always, almost invariably, will substitute the word opportunity for problem, or use the word challenge, but opportunity.
And so when we first organized
the Watershed Association and set up our board of directors.
One of the first directors we had was Don Crocker, who was the general manager of a warehouser company.
And I felt that in the beginning, industries were really, really supportive.
They weren't supportive.
Well, no, all right, not at the very beginning, but they became supportive.
And we worked hard to get their support.
In the beginning... Well, they were supportive.
Were they supportive when they recognized how much money it might cost them?
Their share of the sewage treatment plants?
Which is considerable, right?
Yeah, but now let's take...
Warehouser, for example, they were the largest company, the biggest looter to the river at one time when we first organized.
But they were already taking some measures of their own to treat some of their waste.
But they weren't sure whether
they should go ahead with that or not because federal legislation was just being established then in 1965, the Federal Water Quality Act.
And they then saw the handwriting on the... They then saw that it might be better for them to wait until the federal legislation was passed and...
and requirements were set for industries to abate their pollution because those requirements, well, pretty surely were going to be different from what they were doing.
I have a question.
Obviously a lot of this needed federal money, right?
How did you get federal money?
Okay.
How about maybe we can detail what it was used for?
I think I know it.
Okay, well, there were a bunch of... I'm curious about how you get it.
Maybe, again, it goes back to the squeaky wheel.
Yeah, well, a lot of happy coincidences.
I mean, the Federal Water Quality Act of 1965 was absolutely key to the...
restoration of the Nashua and any river for that matter because it made federal monies available substantial federal monies available for the first time to municipalities and to industries too if they would join in with a municipal treatment facility and
If the Better Water Quality Act of 1965 or some similar legislation had not been passed, we could not have been successful.
It's as basic as that.
Oh, yeah.
All the other projects and the getting the green light, they would have been incidental.
I mean, it would have been a nice try, but you had to have that money.
Well, to clean up the river, to clean up the river...
There definitely had to be state and federal monies invested.
How much finally do you think that you got?
How much were you able to get?
Well, right now the federal government is paying about 90% of the, let's see, 80, 90.
Normally, that's the... About 90%.
Yeah, they're paying about 90% of the cost of construction.
And I think Fitchburg was successful in getting back, yes, they were, those monies.
So I would say that 90% of the construction costs have been made available by federal monies.
And...
with federal money, and then the state has been coming forward with... Okay, but as you say, there were a lot of happy coincidences.
Okay.
However, so the money was made available, or at least it was possible to get some money.
How did you get it?
How did the Nashville get it, say, in the Merrimack River?
I'm from Lowell originally.
Okay.
That means it needs a lot of help.
I noticed they have a new treatment plant.
Do you ever see that one?
Yeah.
I see.
I guess it's still being built.
Yeah, it's enormous.
Yeah, I know it is.
It's being built in a terrible place, too.
It'll never be being built there.
Um...
Well, when you read through these news clippings here, you will see a comment that either Senator Kennedy or Secretary of Interior and Rudolph made when they were visiting the National River in 1966.
And they said that we had been
brought all of these people together, hundreds of people together, to demonstrate our concern for the Nashua.
And they said, boy, is this going to help us when we go back to the Congress and we can tell them that where there had been public apathy,
about polluted rivers.
There is now vital citizen concern.
And so they went back and they voted, Congress voted on $6 billion, you know, for the contrary.
And they said, now $170 million of this is coming to Massachusetts.
Great.
Well, at the same time that we had put together a petition to Governor
And we had, in just, geez, I think it was, I don't know, three weeks, something like this, we gathered over 6,000 signatures, and we took them into Governor Volpe, and they're protesting the condition of the river.
And we knew that a bill within state legislation had been proposed then to set up a division of water pollution.
of 150 million dollars to help construct wastewater treatment facilities.
And so we really went right to work and contacted all of our legislators to ask them to support the passage of this legislation.
And, you know, I think it was a week later the bill was passed and there's been a no-chance passage bill that legislated here.
So we feel
that we really worked awfully hard to gain passage of legislation that was going to provide money.
It wasn't just for the national, though, but for all the communities.
But it was pretty much on a first-come, first-served basis.
And I think initially there was enough money for all the communities, but how many communities were really that interested in organizing?
Because they were going to have to put up some of the local monies themselves, and so there weren't a lot of communities that wanted to be first in line.
Even 10% for them was a lot of money.
Yeah, and before then it was more than that.
Actually, it was 25%, because then the state would put up... Oh, jeez, I guess the federal government would put up... I think that they...
was a maximum like maybe 75% in the beginning and the locals would have to come up with 25% so you didn't see very many cities lining up to be first and but we were really lucky that in Fitchburg we had Bill Flynn who was the mayor then who felt that
the city of Fitchburg had a moral responsibility to do its share to clean up the national river.
And that's pretty rare among mayors.
And that was a very different point of view than previous or succeeding mayors of the city have had.
How many treatment plants did they finally put out?
Two.
And they are the most
I mean, I think Fitchbury, at least about a year ago, was the only city in the United States that had in operation two advanced wastewater treatment facilities.
Why are there two in Fitchbury?
Well, very interesting.
One in West Fitchburg was designed to treat industrial waste primarily.
Yep.
And that is a municipal facility.
And because it's a municipal facility, federal and state monies were given for the construction of that facility.
Now, that would not be possible today.
And the industries would have to build that themselves.
But, of course, construction costs are just a part of the cost.
Another important part of the cost are operation and maintenance costs.
And that's what people in Pitchburg are really trying to do.
You still have some problems in Clinton, though, I guess.
Yes, but we were... What is the problem in Clinton?
What is the problem in Clinton?
Excuse me, I think whoever that is is...
I'll return, you know, these things.
I'll copy them in a copier.
All right.
Yeah.
This is a fascinating little article.
I'm almost finished.
Oh.
Let it go.
Yeah.
You mentioned on the phone that the Nashua has recently been given a B rating.
And reading this, a lot of people thought that a D was the highest it could ever get.
It's supposed to be brought up to, I think they're calling it a B1 now, because they've changed their classification system.
And...
We haven't heard this officially, but we were told that it would probably attain that classification this past winter.
And I just am assuming that it did.
I don't know whether it did or not.
But the state is in the process now of monitoring.
Who can I follow and talk to to get some information on that, do you think?
I think, um, let's see, I think probably a fellow over in Westboro.
Yeah, down the street.
A year old Sanctuary.
They've got, it might be worth your while to go over there to their office.
Have you ever been to their office in Westboro?
No.
I want to do a really powerful job on this.
You know where it is?
No.
What's the name of the office?
I'll find it.
It's a division of Water Pollution Control, and it's at the old... That's where they put out that magazine, I think, right?
Yeah, that's right.
They do, and that's Fish and Wildlife.
But you want to go to Water Pollution Control.
And... Let's see.
That's okay.
Okay.
I think I know who the... Okay.
It's at Lyman School.
Oh.
I think I'm a street from where I live.
Okay.
The guy that we had, who was such a good contact, just left Visual Water Pollution Control to work on an advanced degree, and we don't have a really good... Can I ask you a question and change the subject a little bit?
I'm kind of interested in that photo.
Did it really stink, or were you talking imagery?
No, I don't know that it did when we first moved here.
The drought, I think, really started in about 64.
And the first year we were here, it wasn't as bad.
It became worse after here.
I mean, could you sit here in your porch and have that actual... Oh, yes.
I happen to have a very poor sense of smell, but...
During the drought, not only could it be smelled here, but it could be smelled in the center of Groton.
I mean, it was terrible.
And I remember driving with my kids, and we were little then, we'd be starting down the hill, and they would say, okay, hold your nose, and they'd hold their nose, and they'd hold it as long as they could until we crossed the river, but they could never hold their nose long enough to get beyond this.
terrible smell, isn't it?
I mean, I think it's important when we're talking about how do you clean up a river, you know, we still have to get back to what people can relate to, you know, you're ruining the river, it smells, there's no more fish in there, you know, I think that... Oh, yeah, not only that, but, I mean, the people... The quality of life is going to be adversely altered, I think, you know.
I think these important things are touchstones.
That's right.
And I think that's a very important point to make, that we're really concerned.
We're not concerned just about the fish and the birds.
We're concerned about the people.
And that during the drought,
I know that there was a man in Peckle who was trying to sell his land along the river.
And FHA gave him no value on his land and cited the reason as being the nuisance condition of the river.
So people's land had no value.
They couldn't sell it.
And we felt it was very unjust that people upstream were putting their garbage into the river and dumping it on people's yards downstream and totally devaluing their properties.
And, of course, making it impossible for them to use or enjoy their land.
And it used to be, about 40 years ago, that people in this area swam in the river and really enjoyed the river.
Do you foresee that?
Oh, yes.
Definitely.
Are we close to that, do you think?
We're very close to it.
I just brought you out a little photograph that appeared in the newspaper.
Is this the boy with the rainbow?
Or somebody with a rainbow throat?
Well, there is, yeah.
I mentioned this in my letter to... Now, you know, I mentioned this in my letter to Country Journal.
And I said, just recently, because you had mentioned this, I said a young fly boat, a young fisherman caught a punk rainbow.
Oh, this is true.
This just happened to be a picture of a rainbow trout in the North Nashua River in the city of Fitchburg now.
Who would have ever, in Fitchburg, would ever have thought that there would be fish in the river again?
And it's incredible.
Can I borrow this too?
You can have it.
But there are people right now who are fishing in the National River here in this section.
You have to tell them where I go take pictures of some of these things.
And they are catching trout and pickerel and bat.
Now, is the state stocking it with these fish?
No.
They're just coming back?
The state isn't stocking the Nashwood yet, but they are stocking some of the tributaries, the Nisiticits and the Squanacos.
And they're making their way into the Nashwood?
Yeah.
Isn't that something like that?
And there are eagles.
Now, bald eagles, decided this year and last year.
Where?
On the National River here in the Bronx.
And what's the significance?
I had that in my letter.
Yeah.
You mentioned that.
Well, I'm not sure what the whole significance of that is.
I think, one, is that we do have a...
for eagles.
That is a large enough natural area that eagles are coming into this area.
And we do have a great blue heron in Osprey here.
And it is a resting and feeding area for waterfowl.
And I don't know if these birds are nesting here or not, but this is something that we are seeking to determine now.
You're pretty sure that they would have vacated when the river was out of prison?
The eagles were not here before.
And, of course, they are catching food in the river, catching fish.
Sure, right.
So they are feeding here.
Now, you mentioned some of the tributaries in the Mississippi.
In cleaning up the Nashua and the river branches off, I mean, does part of your effort extend to these tributaries too?
Yes.
And how about the success?
Very successful.
I don't have a map here to show you.
We're having a map prepared at our office now, which is showing all the land in the Greenway.
Oh, I'd love to see that.
Yes.
It might be one we could send to Country Journal.
Yeah, yeah.
And we're very lucky that there is such an active group on both.
I have a map of this.
I have all of Everett's stories.
Okay.
I don't know if you have any of them.
I do.
It works.
Well, on the Niseticit River, there is a Niseticit River Land Trust, which is very active.
Is this pretty current now?
This is now 74, but very clean, relatively clean.
Yes, the Niseticit is very clean, and the Niseticit and the Squanacook are, the Niseticit is particularly fine stream.
It used to get bad right around here, right?
Yeah, it was bad right from West Fitchburg, from
warehouse where they used to empty in to the river even before it became, it was the Whitman River before it even became the North Nashua.
That was where the pollution started and the river became unsuitable.
It was grossly polluted from that point, just below
the Snow's Mill Pond.
Do you know Snow's Mill Pond?
Yes, I do.
Okay.
Well, all the way to Nashua, New Hampshire, it was grossly polluted.
And the Squanacook River
It was polluted from here to here by two paper companies in West Groton constructed their own wastewater treatment facilities and restored this section of the Squanicoke.
Is this independent of your efforts?
No.
It wasn't independent of our efforts.
So that's part of the whole thing.
It's part of the whole thing.
I'll tell you one thing that I think is significant and that's really been helpful to us is that, and I think that a big part of it was luck and coincidence, but at the very beginning of our efforts, I think we did just about everything right.
had been contacted, and you will read about this, you already read about it, this fellow from Hollis, New Hampshire, Wayne Kimmelin, was the chair of the conservation mission there, and they got a petition to their government, okay, and they contacted us, and that's what I thought.
Oh, jeez, I really, really wish you'd acquire the land first, but here is an opportunity to do something about cleaning up the river.
I mean, we're in this drought situation.
The river will never be worse than it is now.
People's attention is focused on the river, so we'd better go with that.
And besides, Hollis has already become interested.
So I then contacted a couple of people.
I didn't know them, but people that I'd
had heard were leaders in their communities.
Got them to sit down with me to plot a strategy and we decided that we would develop this petition effort in Massachusetts.
And we got all of our signatures and took them in and decided to take them in to Governor Baldy.
And my husband made this very good suggestion.
He said
Our efforts would have much greater effect on Governor Bolte if our top elected officials presented the petition than if a group of citizens went in with the petition.
And somebody else said, oh, you really ought to have something really dramatic, something splashy.
And so we got this bottle of polluted river water, which was very splashy.
And so...
that ran them out of the river?
No, as it turns out, it wasn't.
It was not taken just at random.
It was a so-called good sample.
And so I got contact with the mayors of the cities and the chairman of the board of the selectmen and asked them if they would present the petition to the governor.
And...
make this presentation.
Oh, and then I... But how many mayors did you... All of them, 15, I guess, the mayors, all the mayors and the chairmen of the board of selectmen along the river in Massachusetts, I guess they were 13, went in to present these petitions.
And then I contacted, I identified all of our state legislators who represented us to ask them if they would be present.
They were all there, and I think there were 24 of them, except one whose youngster had become very sick and couldn't be there.
And this made a great impression on Governor Dalby.
And I felt he was sincere when he said that he was tremendously impressed with the fact that these busy people would take the time
and showed the interest to make this presentation.